Every year, plants, bacteria, and algae Earth-wide make around 150 billion metric tons of food
for themselves and almost every other living thing on Earth.
How do they do it?
Photosynthesis.
In plants, this astonishingly intricate process takes place in a highly organized structure
called a chloroplast, where a green pigment, chlorophyll, and other pigments collect and
use the energy from visible light with amazing efficiency.
In photosynthesis, this energy is used to do something that happens nowhere else in the
natural world, split water into hydrogen ions and oxygen molecules.
Hydrogen ions combine with carbon dioxide to make sugar, which can be used by plants to
make all the other complex molecules that they need to grow.
Most of the oxygen is expelled as an unused byproduct.
One that we can't move without.
About half of the oxygen we and other organisms breathe comes from phytoplankton, microscopic
organisms that drift in the ocean.
And the smallest one yet discovered, a cyanobacterium, is also the most abundant.
Though invisible to the naked eye, these bacteria alone produce around one fifth of the oxygen
on Earth.
Nearly all living things need oxygen, and they depend on other life forms to make it.
The amazingly complex process of combining carbon dioxide with the water that constantly
cycles on our planet and energy from the sun gives us every bite of food and every breath
of air we need.
What do you think?
Did photosynthesis evolve or was it designed?